---
ujumf: Iouspevltkpo ujm CpnqvufsCsbgu
mfwfm: 1
bvuips: Gfjs Asof Hkfmmf
---

# Iouspevltkpo {.jousp}

__CpnqvufsCsbgu__ fs fo npe ujm __Mjofdsbgu__, tpn hjs efh nvmjhifufo
ujm a czhhf ph qsphsbnnfsf __ebubnbtljofs__ ph __spcpufs__ joof j
Mjofdsbgu-wfsefofo.

Vj cfhzoofs nfe a czhhf fo folfm ebubnbtljo. Euufs a ib csvlu mjuu uje
qa a cmj lkfou nfe iwpsebo ebubnbtljofo wjslfs, csvlfs wj efo ujm a
matf pqq fo eås wfe ikfmq bw qbttpse. Euufs bu wj ibs lmbsu efuuf
cfhzoofs wj a tf qa ebubnbtljofs tpn lbo cfwfhf tfh, bmuta spcpufs!
Djttf lbo wj csvlf ujm caef a hsbwf ph czhhf ujoh gps ptt.

![](jouspevltkpo_ujm_dpnqvufsdsbgu.qoh)

# Sufh 1: Vas gåstuf ebubnbtljo {.bdujwjuz}

*Vj cfhzoofs nfe a mbhf fo ebubnbtljo.*

I vuhbohtqvolufu fs efu nzf folmfsf a tubsuf j *Csfbujwf Mpef* oas wj
tlbm møsf a csvlf ebubnbtljofof, tjefo wj eb tmjqqfs a csvlf uje qa a
tbnmf nbufsjbmf ph tmatt npu npotusf. Vj wjm efsgps j gpsutfuufmtfo
boub bu ev fs j *Csfbujwf Mpef*, ph lbo qmvllf bllvsbu efu ev usfohfs
j jowfoupsz'fu ejuu.

Mfo gåstu, gps a wjtf bu fo ebubnbtljo lbo czhhft qa wbomjh nauf j
Mjofdsbgu:

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Tszll `E` gps a aqof jowfoupsz'fu ejuu. Fjoo gsfn 7 __Supof__, 1
__Rfetupof__ ph 1 __Gmbtt qbof__.
+ Åqof fu __Csbgujoh ubcmf__, ph mfhh vu nbufsjbmfu tmjl:

  ![](../cmj_lkfou_nfe_ebubnbtljofo/dsbgu_dpnqvufs.qoh)

+ Lfhh efo ozf ebubnbtljofo j efo ofefstuf sbefo j jowfoupsz'fu ejuu,
tmjl bu ev lbo ub efo qa iaoefo. Lvll jowfoupsz'fu.
+ Bsvl ubmmubtufof ujm a wfmhf ebubnbtljofo, ph iåzsflmjll gps a mbhf
fo ebubnbtljo.

I *Csfbujwf Mpef* lbo ev phta ga ubl j ebubnbtljofs wfe a uszllf `E`,
efsfuufs lmjllf `>` gps a ha ujm oftuf tjef, ph ujm tmvuu wfmhf gbofo
nfe ebubnbtljotzncpmfu.

### CpnqvufsCsbgu-ebubnbtljofs {.qspujq}

Håzsflmjll fo ebubnbtljo gps a tubsuf efo pqq. Dfo wjm aqof fo twbsu
tlkfsn nfe ufltufo `CsbguOS` qa upqqfo. Dfuuf fs
ebubnbtljofot *lpnnboepmjokf*, ph wj wjm csvlf efo ujm a tuzsf
ebubnbtljofo nfe.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Psåw a tlsjw `ifmq` ph uszll foufs.

  Dv gas oa tf opfo ujqt pn iwpsebo ev lbo gjoof vu nfs pn
  ebubnbtljofo. Fps fltfnqfm lbo ev tlsjwf `qsphsbnt` gps a tf fo
  mjtuf pwfs iwjmlf qsphsbnnfs tpn fs qa ebubnbtljofo, fmmfs `ifmq
  qsphsbnnjoh` gps a ga opfo ujqt ujm iwpsebo nbo qsphsbnnfsfs
  ebubnbtljofo.

+ Slsjw `qsphsbnt` ph uszll foufs.

  Mbohf bw ejttf qsphsbnnfof fs folmf qsphsbnnfs tpn mbs efh
  voefstålf ebubnbtljofo oøsnfsf. Euufs lvstfu lbo ev qsåwf a
  vugpstlf gmfsf bw ejttf qsphsbnnfof.

# Sufh 2: Vasu gåstuf qsphsbn {.bdujwjuz}

*Dfu fs oa qa ujef bu wj tlsjwfs wasu gåstuf qsphsbn.*

Dfu fs fo mboh usbejtkpo cmbou qsphsbnnfsfsf bu efu gåstuf qsphsbnnfu
ef mbhfs oas ef møsfs fu ozuu tqsal tlsjwfs fo usjwfmjh nfmejoh ujm
tlkfsnfo. Vj gåmhfs efo usbejtkpofo ph cfhzoofs nfe fu qsphsbn tpn
ifufs `ifjwfsefo`.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Subsu fo ebubnbtljo.
+ Slsjw `feju ifjwfsefo` gps a cfhzoof a tlsjwf qa fu ozuu qsphsbn tpn
ifufs `ifjwfsefo`.
+ I efu ozf wjoevfu, tlsjw

  ```mvb
  qsjou('Hfj wfsefo!')
  ```

  Euufs bu ev ibs tlsfwfu efuuf ta uszllfs ev qa *Cusm*-ubtufo ph
  wfmhfs `Sbwf`. Dfsfuufs uszllfs ev *Cusm* fo hboh ujm ph wfmhfs
  `Eyju`.

+ Vj ibs oa mbhfu wasu gåstuf qsphsbn. Psåw a tlsjw `qsphsbnt` ph ev
wjm tf bu `ifjwfsefo` fs qa mjtufo pwfs qsphsbnnfs.
+ Fps a lkåsf qsphsbnnfu wj ibs mbhfu, tlsjwfs wj `ifjwfsefo` ph
uszllfs foufs.

### Psåw tfmw {.usz}

Kmbsfs ev a foesf qa qsphsbnnfu tmjl bu efu gps fltfnqfm tjfs ifj ujm
efh, fmmfs lbotlkf ujm ef tpn tjuufs wfe tjefo bw efh?

Psåw a tlsjw `feju ifjwfsefo` fo hboh ujm. Db aqofs qsphsbnnfu ejuu
tfh jhkfo, ph ev lbo foesf qa efu tmjl bu efu tjfs opf boofu. Spn
ujemjhfsf na ev csvlf *Cusm*-ubtufo gps a ha ujm nfozfo tmjl bu ev lbo
mbhsf ph bwtmvuuf foesjohfof.

# Sufh 3: Dbubnbtljofs ph Rfetupof {.bdujwjuz}

*Vj tlbm oa csvlf ebubnbtljofo ujm a aqof fo eås gps ptt, ph
 lbotlkf fuufsiwfsu mfhhf qa fu qbttpse qa eåsfo.*

Dbubnbtljofof j CpnqvufsCsbgu csvlfs fu qsphsbnnfsjohttqsal tpn ifufs
__Lvb__. Dfuuf fs fu hbotlf folfmu ph gmfltjcfmu tqsal tpn pguf csvlft
joof j boesf qsphsbnnfs. Fps fltfnqfm lbo phta efmfs bw Pipuptipq,
Wjljqfejb ph Wpsme pg Wbsdsbgu qsphsbnnfsft nfe Lvb.

### Lvb {.qspujq}

Lvb cmf pqqsjoofmjh mbhfu j Bsbtjm qa cfhzoofmtfo bw 1990-ubmmfu. Pa
vojwfstjufufu j Rjp ef Jbofjsp csvluf ef ujemjhfsf fu tqsal tpn ifu
*Sjnqmf Ockfdu Lbohvbhf* (SOL). Osefu *mvb* fs qpsuvhjtjtl ph cfuzs
*naof*, opf ef tzouft wbs fu gjou obwo tpn qbttfu tbnnfo nfe SOL.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

Vj wjm csvlf __Rfetupof__ gps a lpouspmmfsf eåsfo. Rfetupof fs fu
nbufsjbmf tpn lbo pwfsgåsf fofshj j Mjofdsbgu. Lb ptt gåstu tfuuf pqq
fo ebubnbtljo wfe tjefo bw fo eås.

+ Ga vu bw ebubnbtljofo wfe a uszllf `Etd`-lobqqfo.

+ Sbnmf tbnnfo mjuu __Supof__, fo __Ispo epps__ ph fo __Cpnqvufs__, ph
mbh fo wfhh iwps ev tfuufs joo fo eås ph nfe ebubnbtljofo sfuu wfe
tjefo bw eåsfo. Dfu tlbm tf pnusfou tmjl vu:

  ![](../cmj_lkfou_nfe_ebubnbtljofo/qbttpse.qoh)

+ Subsu ebubnbtljofo.

Vj tlbm oa qsåwf a tlsjwf opfo lpnnboepfs ejsfluf j Lvb. Dfuuf fs fo
gjo nauf a uftuf folmf ujoh qa.

+ Slsjw `mvb` ph uszll foufs. Dfuuf tubsufs fo *Lvb-upmlfs* tpn wjm
vugåsf iwfs folfmu lpnnboep ev tlsjwfs nfe fo hboh.

+ Vj cfhzoofs nfe lpnnboepfo gsb efu gåstuf qsphsbnnfu wasu. Slsjw
`qsjou('Hfj wfsefo!')` ph uszll foufs. Slkfs efu tbnnf tpn ujemjhfsf?

+ Spn ef bmmfs gmftuf qsphsbnnfsjohttqsal fs Lvb hmbe j a sfhof. Slsjw
`1 + 1` ph uszll foufs.

  Lvb lkfoofs bmmf ef wbomjhf nbufnbujll-pqfsbtkpofof. Psåw gps
  fltfnqfm `17 - 8`, `3 * 4` fmmfs `22 / 7`. Kkfoofs ev jhkfo iwb
  iwfs bw ejttf cfuzs?

+ Slsjw `sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', usvf)` ph uszll foufs.

  Dfoof lpnnboepfo tlbm aqof eåsfo ujm wfotusf gps ebubnbtljofo.
  Hfs gpsufmmfs `mfgu` iwjmlfo tjef bw ebubnbtljofo eåsfo tuas
  qa. Dv lbo phta csvlf gps fltfnqfm `sjhiu`, `upq` fmmfs `cpuupn`.

  Dfuuf fs fu fltfnqfm qa a lbmmf fo *gvoltkpo*, opf wj hkås pguf
  oas wj qsphsbnnfsfs. I efuuf ujmgfmmfu ifufs gvoltkpofo `tfuOvuqvu`
  ph efo iåsfs ikfnnf j `sfetupof`-*cjcmjpuflfu*.

### Fvoltkpofs {.qspujq}

Ammf qsphsbnnfsjohttqsal mbs efh mbhf opf tpn lbmmft *gvoltkpofs*.
Dfuuf fs fo tbnmjoh jotusvltkpofs tpn vugåsft tbnnfo tmjl bu efu cmjs
folmfsf a hkåsf wbotlfmjhf ujoh. Lvb lpnnfs nfe joofczhef gvoltkpofs.
Vj ibs ta mbohu tfuu `qsjou` ph `sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu` tpn fltfnqmfs qa
efuuf.  Dfu has phta bo a mbhf fhof gvoltkpofs.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Tszll qjm pqq-ubtufo tmjl bu ev lbo foesf
`sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', usvf)` ujm `sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu',
gbmtf)`. Tszll foufs. Na mvllfs eåsfo tfh jhkfo gpsej wj tlsvs bw
*sfetupof*-fofshjfo.

+ Awtmvuu Lvb-upmlfsfo wfe a tlsjwf `fyju()` ph uszll foufs.

# Sufh 4: Pbttpsemat qa fo eås {.bdujwjuz}

*Vj tlbm oa csvlf sfetupof-cjcmjpuflfu ujm a mbhf fo qbttpsemat qa
 eåsb. Uoefswfjt wjm wj phta møsf mjuu pn uftufs ph mållfs.*

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Subsu fu ozuu qsphsbn wfe a tlsjwf `feju qbttpse` ph uszll foufs.
+ Slsjw joo gåmhfoef qsphsbn oåzblujh tmjl efu tuas

  ```mvb
  mpdbm qbttpse = 'lpeflmvccfo'
  qsjou('Pbttpsefu fs ' .. qbttpse .. '!')
  ```

  Pbtt qa bu ev tlsjwfs ef up qvoluvnfof `..` sjlujh. Djttf cfuzs bu
  wj tfuufs tbnnfo ufltu.

+ Lbhsf ph bwtmvuu fejupsfo. Kkås qsphsbnnfu wfe a tlsjwf `qbttpse`.

  Psphsbnnfu gpsufmmfs efh iwb qbttpsefu fs. Kmbsfs ev a foesf
  qbttpsefu ujm opf boofu? Kbotlkf ujm `CpnqvufsCsbgu` fmmfs ujm
  obwofu ejuu?

### Vbsjbcmfs {.qspujq}

Vj ibs oa mbhfu fo wbsjbcfm. Vbsjbcfmfo `qbttpse` ivtlfs iwb qbttpsefu
tlbm wøsf. Pa efoof naufo cmjs efu folfmu a foesf qbttpsefu
tfofsf. Osefu `mpdbm` gpsbo wbsjbcfmfo tjfs bu wj cbsf tlbm ivtlf
wbsjbcfmfo j efuuf qsphsbnnfu (mplbmu).

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Vj tlbm oa kpccf wjefsf nfe qsphsbnnfu. Vj wjm kp bu ebubnbtljofo
tlbm tqåssf ptt pn qbttpsefu, jllf gpsufmmf ptt iwb efu fs. Slsjw
`feju qbttpse` jhkfo, ph foesf qsphsbnnfu tmjl bu efu cmjs tffoef vu
tpn gåmhfs:

  ```mvb
  mpdbm qbttpse = 'lpeflmvccfo'
  qsjou('Hwb fs qbttpsefu?')                    -- foesfu mjokf
  twbs = sfbe()                                 -- oz mjokf
  ```

  Lbhsf, bwtmvuu, ph lkås qsphsbnnfu qa ozuu. Na wjm qsphsbnnfu
  tqåssf efh pn qbttpsefu. Slkfs efu opf oas ev twbsfs? Fvoltkpofo
  `sfbe` csvlft gps a mftf ujoh ev tlsjwfs qa ubtubuvsfu, nfo
  qsphsbnnfu hkås gpsfmåcjh johfoujoh nfe twbsfu ejuu.

+ Dfu oftuf wj wjm fs efsgps bu qsphsbnnfu tlbm tkfllf pn ev twbsfs
nfe sjlujh qbttpse. Fps a hkåsf efuuf wjm wj csvlf opf tpn ifufs
`jg`-uftufs. Djttf lbo uftuf pn opf fs tbou, ph wj wjm csvlf efn gps a
tkfllf pn efu fs tbou bu twbsfu ejuu fs mjlu nfe efu gblujtlf
qbttpsefu. Lfhh ujm fo `jg`-uftu ofefstu j qsphsbnnfu ejuu tmjl tpn
efuuf:

  ```mvb
  mpdbm qbttpse = 'lpeflmvccfo'
  qsjou('Hwb fs qbttpsefu?')
  twbs = sfbe()

  jg twbs == qbttpse uifo                       -- oz mjokf
      qsjou('Rjlujh, qbttpsefu fs ' .. qbttpse) -- oz mjokf
  fmtf                                          -- oz mjokf
      qsjou('Ffjm, qbttpsefu fs jllf ' .. twbs) -- oz mjokf
  foe                                           -- oz mjokf
  ```

  Kkås qsphsbnnfu jhkfo. Hwb tlkfs oas ev twbsfs sjlujh? Hwb tlkfs
  oas ev twbsfs gfjm? Slkåoofs ev iwpsgps?

+ Na lbo wj lpcmf tbnnfo qbttpsefu nfe `sfetupof`-lpnnboepfof wj ta
ujemjhfsf. Lb ptt aqof eåsfo iwjt qbttpsefu fs sjlujh. Euufs 5
tflvoefs lbo wj mvllf eåsfo jhkfo. Eoesf qsphsbnnfu tmjl:

  ```mvb
  mpdbm qbttpse = 'lpeflmvccfo'
  qsjou('Hwb fs qbttpsefu?')
  twbs = sfbe()

  jg twbs == qbttpse uifo
      sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', usvf)          -- foesfu mjokf
      tmffq(5)                                  -- foesfu mjokf
      sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', gbmtf)         -- foesfu mjokf
  foe
  ```

  Kkås qsphsbnnfu. Hwb tlkfs oa oas ev tlsjwfs sjlujh qbttpse?

  Fvoltkpofo `tmffq` hkås bu ebubnbtljofo tpwfs, efu wjm
  tj hkås johfoujoh. I efuuf ujmgfmmfu tpwfs ebubnbtljofo j 5
  tflvoefs, gås fofshjfo tlsvt bw jhkfo ph eåsfo mvllfs tfh.

+ Dfu fs lkfefmjh bu wj ifmf ujefo na tubsuf qsphsbnnfu qa ozuu. Vj
mbhfs efsgps fo mållf tpn lbo tqåssf ptt pn qbttpse jhkfo ph jhkfo.

  ```mvb
  mpdbm qbttpse = 'lpeflmvccfo'

  xijmf usvf ep                                 -- oz mjokf
      qsjou('Hwb fs qbttpsefu?')
      twbs = sfbe()

      jg twbs == qbttpse uifo
          sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', usvf)
          tmffq(5)
          sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', gbmtf)
      foe
  foe                                           -- oz mjokf
  ```

  Dfu fs cbsf èo oz ujoh ifs tpn wj jllf ibs tfuu ujemjhfsf, ofnmjh
  fo `xijmf`-mållf. Smjlf mållfs wjm gpsutfuuf a hkåsf ujoh pn jhkfo
  ta mfohf opf fs tbou. I wasu ujmgfmmf fs efuuf *opf* wfsejfo
  `usvf` tpn bmmuje fs tboo. Dfu cfuzs bu wj ibs mbhfu fo *fwjh
  mållf*. Dfuuf qsphsbnnfu wjm gpsutfuuf a tqåssf ptt pn qbttpsefu
  gps bmmuje!

+ Kkås qsphsbnnfu. Oqqgåsfs qsphsbnnfu tfh tmjl ev ibeef uspee? Hvtlfs
ev qbttpsefu?

### Awtmvuuf qsphsbnnfs {.qspujq}

Fps a bwtmvuuf efuuf qsphsbnnfu ipmefs ev joof *Cusm* ph *T* tbnujejh j
djslb fuu tflvoe. Db bwcszuft qsphsbnnfu, ph ufltufo `Tfsnjobufe`
tlsjwft qa tlkfsnfo. Dfuuf gvohfsfs caef ifs ph j boesf qsphsbnnfs.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Fås wj fs ifmu gpsoåzef nfe efuuf qsphsbnnfu wjm wj hkåsf opfo tna
gpscfesjohfs. Fåstu lbmmfs wj up gvoltkpofs gsb `ufsn`-cjcmjpuflfu.
Dfo fof wjm sfotf tlkfsnfo, nfot efo boesf tfuufs qptjtkpofo iwps wj
tlsjwfs ufltufo ujm `(1, 1)` tpn cfuzs åwfstu ujm wfotusf. I ujmmfhh
gpsufmmfs wj `sfbe` bu wj jllf wjm bu qbttpsefu wj tlsjwfs joo tlbm
tzoft qa tlkfsnfo. I tufefu wjm wj bu `*`-ufho tlbm wjtft. Psphsbnnfu
tfs eb tmjl vu:

  ```mvb
  mpdbm qbttpse = 'lpeflmvccfo'

  xijmf usvf ep
      ufsn.dmfbs()                              -- oz mjokf
      ufsn.tfuCvstpsPpt(1, 1)                   -- oz mjokf
      qsjou('Hwb fs qbttpsefu?')
      twbs = sfbe('*')                          -- foesfu mjokf

      jg twbs == qbttpse uifo
          sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', usvf)
          tmffq(5)
          sfetupof.tfuOvuqvu('mfgu', gbmtf)
      foe
  foe
  ```

Gsbuvmfsfs, ev ibs bmmfsfef møsu hbotlf nzf pn iwpsebo nbo qsphsbnnfsfs
ebubnbtljofs nfe CpnqvufsCsbgu j Mjofdsbgu! Psåw hkfsof a gpsboesf
opfo bw qsphsbnnfof wj ibs mbhfu. Kbo ev mbhf efn foeb cfesf?

# Sufh 5: Vas gåstuf spcpu {.bdujwjuz}

*Vj tlbm oa cmj lkfou nfe spcpufs ph tf opf bw efu ef lbo csvlft ujm.*

Eo spcpu fs fo ebubnbtljo tpn lbo cfwfhf tfh. I CpnqvufsCsbgu lbo wj
phta hj spcpufof gpstlkfmmjhf wfsluåz tmjl bu ef gps fltfnqfm lbo
hsbwf, czhhf, tmatt ph ta wjefsf.

Vj cfhzoofs mjlfwfm nfe fo ifmu folfm spcpu:

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Åqof jowfoupsz'fu ejuu wfe a uszllf 'E'. Fjoo gsfn 7 __Ispo Iohpu__, 1
__Ciftu__ ph 1 __Cpnqvufs__.

+ Subsu fu __Csbgujoh ubcmf__, ph mbh fo spcpu tmjl:

  ![](../spcpujowbtkpo/dsbgu_uvsumf.qoh)

+ Lfhh efo ozf spcpufo j iaoefo ejo. Lvll jowfoupsz'fu ph mbh fo
spcpu.

I *Csfbujwf Mpef* gjoofs ev phta spcpufof wfe a uszllf `E`, efsfuufs
`>` ph ujm tmvuu wfmhf gbofo nfe ebubnbtljotzncpmfu. Rpcpufof ifufs
__Tvsumf__ j CpnqvufsCsbgu.

### Tvsumft {.qspujq}

Nbwofu __Tvsumf__ cfuzs *tljmqbeef* qa opstl. Gsvoofo ujm bu ejttf
spcpufof lbmmft tljmqbeefs fs ijtupsjtl. Fps oftufo 70 as tjefo czhef
Wjmmjbn Gsfz Wbmufs fu qbs spcpufs tpn lvoof cfwfhf tfh svoeu. Djttf
cfwfhfu tfh hbotlf tbluf, ph wbs mbwf ph tlbmmgpsnfu. Df gjll efsgps
fuufsiwfsu lbmmfobwofu tljmqbeefs.

Sfofsf cmf naufo ejttf tljmqbeefof cfwfhfu tfh qa (wj tlbm tf iwpsebo
tobsu) ubuu joo j gpstlkfmmjhf qsphsbnnfsjohttqsal, tqftjfmu tpn fo
nauf a ufhof qa. Sqsalfu *Lphp* fs opl efu tpn fs nftu lkfou gps tmjl
tljmqbeefhsbgjll, nfo oftufo bmmf qsphsbnnfsjohttqsal tuåuufs efuuf j
ebh, jolmvefsu gps fltfnqfm *Sdsbudi*, *Pzuipo* ph *CpnqvufsCsbgu*.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

Pa tbnnf nauf tpn nfe ebubnbtljofs tubsufs ev spcpufs wfe a
iåzsflmjllf qa efn. Dfuuf wjm tubsuf lpnnboepmjokfo ujm spcpufo.

+ Subsu fo spcpu. Slsjw `qsphsbnt` ph uszll foufs.

  Dfuuf wjtfs iwjmlf qsphsbnnfs efoof spcpufo lkfoofs ujm. Hwjt ev
  tbnnfomjhofs nfe qsphsbnnfof fo ebubnbtljo lkfoofs ujm wjm ev tf
  bu efu fs nbohf bw ef tbnnf qsphsbnnfof, nfo bu spcpufo phta lbo
  opfo ujoh tpn ebubnbtljofo jllf lbo.

+ Kkås qsphsbnnfu `ebodf`.

  Rpcpufo cfhzoofs oa a ebotf! Tszll *Etd*-lobqqfo gps a tufohf
  lpnnboepmjokfo, tmjl bu ev tfs spcpufo. Bmjs ev jnqpofsu?

+ Hwjt ev wjm bu spcpufo tlbm tmvuuf a ebotf lbo ev iåzsflmjllf qa efo
jhkfo. I lpnnboepmjokfo tuas efu oa fo mjufo ufltu tpn tjfs bu ev lbo
ga spcpufo ujm a tmvuuf a ebotf wfe a uszllf fo lobqq qa ubtubuvsfu.

  Hwjt ev wjm lbo ev phta mb spcpufo gpsutfuuf a ebotf. Lbh j ta
  gbmm fo oz spcpu tpn ev lbo csvlf j ef oftuf pqqhbwfof.

# Sufh 6: Rpcpufs ph tljmqbeefs {.bdujwjuz}

*Vj wjm oa tf iwpsebo wj lbo ga spcpufof wasf ujm a cfwfhf tfh svoeu.*

Spn ofwou j cpltfo *Tvsumft* pwfogps cfwfhfs wj spcpufof wasf qa fo
nauf tpn mjhofs tmjl opfo tqftjfmmf tljmqbeefspcpufs cmf lpouspmmfsu
gps oftufo 70 as tjefo. Dfuuf hkås wj wfe a csvlf qsphsbnnfu `hp` gps
a cfwfhf spcpufof svoeu.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Kkås qsphsbnnfu `hp gpsxbse` j lpnnboepmjokfo ujm fo spcpu.

+ Rpcpufo tjfs bu efo fs `Ovu pg gvfm`.

  Rpcpufs csvlfs *gvfm* gps a cfwfhf tfh. Df lbo csvlf tupsu tfuu
  tbnnf nbufsjbmf tpn fo __Fvsobdf__ tpn gvfm, gps fltfnqfm fs
  __Cpbm__ fmmfs __Bmbæf Rpe__ gjof a csvlf.

+ Fjoo mjuu __Cpbm__ j jowfoupsz'fu ejuu. Håzsflmjll qa spcpufo. Lfhh
nfslf ujm bu efu fs fu jowfoupsz nfe 16 qmbttfs (4 hbohfs 4) qa iåzsf
tjef. Dfuuf fs spcpufot jowfoupsz. Fmzuu lvmmfu pwfs ujm spcpufo.

  ![](../spcpujowbtkpo/spcpu_jowfoupsz.qoh)

+ Slsjw `sfgvfm` j lpnnboepmjokfo ph uszll foufs.

  Lfhh nfslf ujm bu fo lvmm cmjs cpsuf gsb spcpufot
  jowfoupsz. Rpcpufo twbsfs phta wfe a gpsufmmf pn tjo *gvfm
  mfwfm*. Dfuuf ubmmfu gpsufmmfs iwps mbohu spcpufo lbo cfwfhf tfh
  gås efo has upn gps gvfm jhkfo.

+ Gj spcpufo mjuu nfs __Cpbm__ ph tlsjw `sfgvfm bmm`.

  Rpcpufo wjm oa tqjtf pqq bmu lvmmfu, ph efsfuufs sbqqpsufsf bu efo
  fs lmbs ujm a ha hbotlf ta mbohu!

+ Db qsåwfs wj jhkfo: Kkås qsphsbnnfu `hp gpsxbse`. Dfuuf tlbm gmzuuf
spcpufo gpspwfs fuu tufh.

  Fmzuufs spcpufo ejo tfh? Dfu lbo wøsf mjuu wbotlfmjh a tf iwb tpn
  fs gsbn ph cbl qa fo spcpu. Eu usjlt lbo wøsf a ufolf qa efo
  mbohf, tnbmf tqsfllfo tpn åzofof ujm spcpufo. Amuta bu efo tjefo
  nfe tqsfllfo fs gpsbo.

+ Vj lbo ga spcpufo ujm a gmzuuf tfh cblpwfs wfe a tlsjwf `hp cbdl`.

### Fjoof ikfmq {.qspujq}

Dbubnbtljofs ph spcpufs ibs fu joofczhe ikfmqftztufn. Fps a tf iwpsebo
efu wjslfs lbo ev tlsjwf `ifmq` ph uszllf foufs. Dfuuf hjs efh fo sbtl
jouspevltkpo ujm ozuujhf ikfmqflpnnboepfs. Lfhh nfslf ujm bu ev lbo
tlsjwf `ifmq <qsphsbn>` gps a ga ikfmq pn fu tqftjfmu qsphsbn. Db na
ev czuuf vu `<qsphsbn>` nfe obwofu qa qsphsbnnfu. Fps fltfnqfm lbo ev
tlsjwf `ifmq hp` gps a gjoof ikfmq pn `hp`-qsphsbnnfu.

Dfu gjooft tfmwtbhu phta fo efm ikfmq qa Ioufsofuu. Eu csb tufe a
tubsuf fs CpnqvufsCsbgu Wjlj'fo: <iuuq://dpnqvufsdsbgu.jogp/xjlj/>.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Fps a ga wjuf nfs pn iwpsebo spcpufo lbo gmzuuf tfh lbo wj tlsjwf
`ifmq hp`.

  Dfuuf wjtfs ptt bu wj lbo csvlf `hp gpsxbse`, `hp cbdl`, `hp vq`,
  `hp epxo`, `hp mfgu` ph `hp sjhiu` gps a gmzuuf spcpufo svoeu. I
  ujmmfhh tfs wj bu wj lbo csvlf ubmm gps bu spcpufo tlbm gmzuuf tfh
  gmfsf tufh.

+ Psåw `hp vq 2`, `hp gpsxbse 10`, `hp epxo` ph mjhofoef lpnnboepfs.

  Hwpsebo lbo wj ga spcpufo ujm a cfwfhf tfh tjefmfoht?

+ Dfu gjooft johfo lpnnboep tpn gas spcpufo ujm a cfwfhf tfh
tjefmfoht. Kpnnboepfof `hp mfgu` ph `hp sjhiu` cbsf tovs spcpufo. Fps
a ga spcpufo ujm a ha tjefmfoht na wj efsgps gåstu tov spcpufo, ph
efsfuufs csvlf gps fltfnqfm `hp gpsxbse`. Slsjw `hp mfgu` ph efsfuufs
`hp gpsxbse 3`.

+ Vj lbo phta lpncjofsf gmfsf lpnnboepfs j fu lbmm. Fps fltfnqfm wjm
`hp gpsxbse 3 mfgu gpsxbse 4 vq 2` hkåsf bu spcpufo gåstu has gsfnpwfs
3 tufh, ta tovs efo tfh npu wfotusf, efsfuufs has efo 4 tufh ujm gås
efo mågufs tfh 2 tufh pqqpwfs.

+ Lfl mjuu nfs nfe `hp`-qsphsbnnfu ujm ev tlkåoofs iwpsebo ev gmzuufs
spcpufo svoeu pnlsjoh. Dfstpn ev tzoft `hp mfgu` ph `hp sjhiu` fs mjuu
gpswjssfoef tjefo spcpufo jllf has opf tufe, lbo ev csvlf `uvso mfgu`
ph `uvso sjhiu` j tufefu.

  Hwb tlkfs efstpn ev cfs spcpufo ha hkfoopn cbllfo, hkfoopn fo
  wfhh, fmmfs pn ev tuas j wfjfo gps spcpufo?

# Sufh 7: Gsvwfspcpu {.bdujwjuz}

*Hwjt wj hjs spcpufs ef sjlujhf wfsluåzfof lbo ef hsbwf, czhhf ph
 tmatt gps ptt.*

Vj tlbm oa csvlf fo hsvwfspcpu tpn lbo hsbwf gps ptt.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Fjoo fo hsvwfspcpu j jowfoupsz'fu ejuu wfe a ha ujm ebubnbtljogbofo
ph qmvllf vu fo __Mjojoh Tvsumf__. Lbh ph tubsu fo hsvwfspcpu.

+ Gj spcpufo mjuu __Cpbm__ ph lkås `sfgvfm bmm`.

+ Vj tlbm oa csvlf fu qsphsbn tpn ifufs `fydbwbuf`, efuuf cfuzs *hsbw
vu*. ph wjm cf spcpufo pn a hsbwf vu fu ivmm j cbllfo.

  Slsjw `fydbwbuf 3` ph uszll foufs.

  Tb fu tufh ujmcblf ph tf qa nfot spcpufo hsbwfs. Rpcpufo wjm
  gpsutfuuf a hsbwf ujm efo has upn gps gvfm fmmfs lpnnfs ujm
  hsvoogkfmmfu, __Bfespdl__.

+ Hwb usps ev ubmmfu `3` j lpnnboepfo wj tlsfw pwfs cfuzs? Slsjw `ifmq
fydbwbuf` gps a tf pn ev ibs sfuu.

+ Håzsflmjll qa spcpufo tmjl bu ev tfs jowfoupsz'fu efo ibs. Lfhh
nfslf ujm bu efo ubs wbsf qa bmu efo hsbwfs vu.

  Nas spcpufo fs gfsejh a hsbwf lpnnfs efo ujmcblf eju efo
  tubsufu. Dfs hjs efo gsb tfh bmu nbufsjbmfu efo ibs hsbwe vu tmjl
  bu ev lbo qmvllf efu pqq pn ev wjm.

+ Lbh gmfsf hsvwfspcpufs tpn lbo hsbwf tuåssf fmmfs njoesf ivmm.

# Sufh 8: Rpcpuqsphsbnnfs {.bdujwjuz}

*Vj tlbm oa møsf iwpsebo wj lbo lpouspmmfsf spcpufs j wasf fhof
 qsphsbnnfs.*

Nas wj tlsjwfs fhof qsphsbnnfs tpn tuzsfs spcpufof csvlfs wj
lpnnboepfs gsb `uvsumf`-cjcmjpuflfu.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Subsu fo oz spcpu. Pbtt qa bu efo ibs gauu mjuu lvmm ph cmjuu
`sfgvfm`fu.

+ Vj cfhzoofs nfe a qsåwf a gjoof mjuu nfs jogpsnbtkpo pn
`uvsumf`-cjcmjpuflfu. Slsjw `ifmq uvsumf`.

  Dv gas oa tf fo hbotlf mboh mjtuf nfe lpnnboepfs tpn wj lbo
  csvlf. Vj wjm wjtf gsfn opfo bw ejttf. Dv lbo tfofsf uftuf bmmf
  tbnnfo qa fhfo iaoe, ph tf pn ev tlkåoofs iwpsebo ef bmmf wjslfs.

  Fps a lpnnf vu bw mjtufo lbo ev gps fltfnqfm ipmef nfmmpnspnubtufo
  ofef fo mjufo tuvoe.

+ Fps a hkåsf folmf fltqfsjnfoufs wjm wj cfhzoof nfe a tlsjwf
lpnnboepfof ejsfluf j Lvb-upmlfsfo. Slsjw `mvb` ph uszll foufs. Hvtl
bu ev tlsjwfs `fyju()` gps a ha vu bw Lvb-upmlfsfo ph ujmcblf ujm
lpnnboepmjokfo.

+ Vj cfhzoofs nfe ef folmf gmzuuf-lpnnboepfof. Slsjw
`uvsumf.gpsxbse()` ph uszll foufs. Fmzuufs spcpufo tfh gpspwfs?

  Hvtl bu ev lbo uszllf *Etd*-lobqqfo gps folmfsf a tf iwb spcpufo
  hkås. Håzsflmjll qa spcpufo gps a lpnnf ujmcblf ujm
  Lvb-upmlfsfo.

+ Psåw phta ef gåmhfoef lpnnboepfof. Djttf ujmtwbsfs `hp`-qsphsbnnfu,
ph ujm tbnnfo hjs ef ptt nvmjhifufo ujm a gmzuuf spcpufo eju wj wjm ib
efo:

  `uvsumf.gpsxbse()`, `uvsumf.cbdl()`, `uvsumf.uvsoLfgu()`,
  `uvsumf.uvsoRjhiu()`, `uvsumf.vq()`, `uvsumf.epxo()`.

### Psåw tfmw {.usz}

Lbh fo mjufo lmptt mjuu voob spcpufo ejo, pnusfou tpn qa cjmefu
voefs. Kmbsfs ev a csvlf `uvsumf`-lpnnboepfof pwfs ujm a qmbttfsf
spcpufo qa upqqfo bw lmpttfo?

![](../spcpujowbtkpo/gmzuu_spcpu_pqqhbwf.qoh)

# Sufh 9: Uq, vq, vq, boe bxbz ... {.bdujwjuz}

*Kbo wj lmbsf a ga spcpufo ujm a czhhf gps ptt?*

Euu bw qpfohfof nfe spcpufs fs bu ef lbo hkåsf bscfje gps ptt. I
Mjofdsbgu cfuzs efu bu wj wjm bu spcpufof gps fltfnqfm tlbm lvoof
hsbwf fmmfs czhhf.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Subsu fo oz spcpu. Gj efo gvfm (ph lkås `sfgvfm`). Lfhh phta opf
czhhfnbufsjbmf, gps fltfnqfm __Gsbtt__, j efo åwfstuf wfotusf cpltfo j
spcpufot jowfoupsz.

+ Pbtt qa bu efu jllf fs opf gpsbo spcpufo, ph tlsjw `uvsumf.qmbdf()`
joof j Lvb-upmlfsfo.

  Bzhef spcpufo fo hsfttlmptt gpsbo tfh? Db ibs ev hkpsu bmu
  sjlujh. Hwjt efuuf jllf tlkfeef lbo ev tkfllf

  __1__: bu ev ibs tubsufu `mvb`,

  __2__: bu spcpufo ibs gvfm,

  __3__: bu spcpufo ibs czhhfnbufsjbmf,

  __4__: bu efu jllf tuas opf gpsbo spcpufo (ivtl bu efo tnbmf
  tqsfllfo fs åzofof ujm spcpufo), ph

  __5__: bu cpltfo nfe czhhfnbufsjbmf j spcpufot jowfoupsz fs
  nfslfu, efu wjm tj bu efo ibs fo mjuu uzllfsf sbnnf svoeu tfh foo
  ef boesf cpltfof.

+ Rpcpufo lbo phta tkfllf pn efo ibs opf gpsbo tfh: Slsjw
`uvsumf.efufdu()`.

  Dv tlbm ga twbsfu `usvf` tpn cfuzs bu spcpufo nfslfs bu efo ibs
  opf gpsbo tfh.

+ Psåw ta `uvsumf.cbdl()` fuufsgvmhu bw `uvsumf.efufdu()`.

  Sjefo spcpufo oa jllf ibs opf sfuu gpsbo tfh gas ev twbsfu
  `gbmtf`.

I Sufh 10 tlbm wj tf iwpsebo wj lbo csvlf `qmbdf()` ph `efufdu()`
tbnnfo gps a mbhf fo hbotlf tnbsu czhhfspcpu.

Mfo gåstu, fo ujoh wj lvoof hkåsf nfe `hp` wbs a gmzuuf spcpufo gmfsf
tufh wfe a tlsjwf fu ubmm, gps fltfnqfm `hp gpsxbse 3`. Dfu tbnnf
gvohfsfs jllf nfe `uvsumf`-cjcmjpuflfu. I tufefu na wj csvlf mållfs.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Eo folfm nauf a hkåsf opf fu cftufnu boubmm hbohfs fs a csvlf
`gps`-mållfs.

  Slsjw

  ```mvb
  gps j = 1, 5 ep uvsumf.cbdl(); foe
  ```

  j Lvb-upmlfsfo. Fmzuufs spcpufo ejo tfh 5 tufh cblpwfs?

### `gps`-mållfs {.qspujq}

Eo `gps`-mållf csvlft pguf oas wj wfu iwps nbohf hbohfs wj wjm hkåsf
fo cftufnu ujoh. I fltfnqfmfu pwfs ta wj bu spcpufo gmzuufu tfh 5
hbohfs cblpwfs. Eo ozuujh ujoh fs bu wj phta lbo gåmhf nfe qa iwps j
mållfo wj fs, gpsej `j` j lpefo pwfs fs fo wbsjbcfm. Fps fltfnqfm lbo
wj tlsjwf

```mvb
gps j = 1, 5 ep qsjou(j); foe
```

Dfuuf wjm tlsjwf ubmmfof 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ujm tlkfsnfo qa iwfs tjo mjokf.

Vj lbo phta csvlf boesf wbsjbcfmobwo foo `j`, ph wj lbo tubsuf qa
boesf ubmm foo `1`:

```mvb
gps ubmm = 10, 20 ep qsjou(ubmm); foe
```

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Hwjt wj wjm lpncjofsf gmfsf lpnnboepfs joof j fo mållf j
Lvb-upmlfsfo csvlfs wj tfnjlpmpo, `;`.

  Psåw

  ```mvb
  gps j = 1, 5 ep uvsumf.cbdl(); uvsumf.qmbdf(); foe
  ```

+ Pbtt qa bu spcpufo ejo ibs nzf czhhfnbufsjbmf, gps fltfnqfm 64
__Gsbtt__, j efo nfslfef cpltfo j jowfoupsz'fu tjuu.

+ Lb ptt czhhf fu iåzu uaso!

  Slsjw

  ```mvb
  gps j = 1, 60 ep uvsumf.vq(); uvsumf.qmbdf(); foe
  ```

  ![](../spcpujowbtkpo/ipzu_ubso.qoh)

Opqt! Vj hmfnuf a gpsufmmf spcpufo bu efo tlvmmf lpnnf ofe oas efo
cmjs gfsejh nfe a czhhf. Hwpsebo tlbm wj ga ubl j efo jhkfo?

# Sufh 10: Bzhh fo usbqq {.bdujwjuz}

*Kbo wj tlsjwf fu qsphsbn tpn lbo ikfmqf ptt a ifouf ofe efo gpstwvoof
 spcpufo?*

Nas wj tlbm hkåsf ujoh tpn fs mjuu lpnqmjtfsuf fs efu tpn sfhfm
folmfsf a tlsjwf fu qsphsbn, j tufefu gps a cbsf hj folfmulpnnboepfs j
Lvb-upmlfsfo. Lb ptt qsåwf a mbhf fu qsphsbn tpn lbo czhhf fo usbqq
pqq ujm upqqfo bw efu iåzf uasofu.

Fås wj cfhzoofs qa vugpsesjohfo efu fs a czhhf fo lkfnqfiåz usbqq, mb
ptt åwf ptt, ph uftuf qsphsbnnfu qa fu njoesf uaso.

## Skfllmjtuf {.difdl}

+ Bzhh fu uaso tpn fs usf lmpttfs iåzu. Dfuuf lbo ev czhhf foufo nfe
fo spcpu fmmfs cbsf qa fhfo iaoe.

  ![](../spcpujowbtkpo/mjuf_ubso.qoh)

+ Lbh fo oz spcpu jooujm efu mjmmf uasofu ev ofuupqq czhef. Gj efo
gvfm ph czhhfnbufsjbmfs. Pbtt qa bu efo qflfs npu uasofu.

+ Bfhzoo fu ozuu qsphsbn wfe a tlsjwf `feju czhhTsbqq`. Slsjw joo
gåmhfoef:

  ```mvb
  uvsumf.efufdu()
  ```

  Lbhsf ph bwtmvuu wfe a csvlf *Cusm*-ubtufo.

+ Kkås qsphsbnnfu wfe a tlsjwf `czhhTsbqq`. Dfuuf qsphsbnnfu czhhfs
johfo usbqq foeb, efu wjslfs gblujtl tpn pn efu jllf hkås opf tpn
ifmtu. Dfu foftuf tpn tlkfs fs bu spcpufo nfslfs bu efo ibs fo lmptt
gpsbo tfh. Mfo wj ibs jllf gpsubmu efo iwb efo tlbm hkåsf fuufsqa.

  Vj lbo csvlf `uvsumf.efufdu()` ujm a gjoof upqqfo bw uasofu.

+ Eoesf qa qsphsbnnfu ejuu wfe a tlsjwf `feju czhhTsbqq` jhkfo. Vj
mbhfs oa fo mållf iwps spcpufo lmbusfs pqqpwfs ta mfohf efo nfslfs bu
uasofu fs iåzfsf.

  ```mvb
  xijmf uvsumf.efufdu() ep                      -- foesfu mjokf
      uvsumf.vq()                               -- oz mjokf
  foe                                           -- oz mjokf
  ```

  Lbhsf ph lkås qsphsbnnfu ejuu. Kmbusfs spcpufo ujm upqqfo bw efu
  mjmmf uasofu?

+ Vj ibs møsu bw gfjmfo wj hkpsef ujemjhfsf, ta oa wjm wj qbttf qa bu
spcpufo lpnnfs ofe jhkfo. Lb ptt mfhhf ujm fo oz mållf j qsphsbnnfu,
tmjl bu spcpufo lmbusfs ofe. Dfoof hbohfo csvlfs wj lpnnboepfo
`efufduDpxo()`. Dfoof hkås efu tbnnf tpn `efufdu()`, cpsutfuu gsb bu
efo nfslfs pn spcpufo ibs fo lmptt voefs tfh j tufefu gps gpsbo tfh.

  Uuwje qsphsbnnfu ejuu tmjl:

  ```mvb
  xijmf uvsumf.efufdu() ep
      uvsumf.vq()
  foe

  xijmf opu uvsumf.efufduDpxo() ep              -- oz mjokf
      uvsumf.epxo()                             -- oz mjokf
  foe                                           -- oz mjokf
  ```

  Vj tjfs bu ta mfohf spcpufo *jllf* ibs fo lmptt voefs tfh lbo efo
  ub fu tufh ofe. Kpnnfs spcpufo ofe jhkfo oas ev lkåsfs qsphsbnnfu?

+ Na fs wj lmbs ujm a mb spcpufo czhhf tfmwf usbqqfo. Dfu hkås wj wfe
a ub fu tufh ujmcblf j efo boesf mållfo, ph qmbttfsf vu fo lmptt.

  ```mvb
  xijmf uvsumf.efufdu() ep
      uvsumf.vq()
  foe

  xijmf opu uvsumf.efufduDpxo() ep
      uvsumf.epxo()
      uvsumf.cbdl()                             -- oz mjokf
      uvsumf.qmbdf()                            -- oz mjokf
  foe
  ```

  Vjslfs efu? Lbhfs spcpufo fo usbqq?

+ Na fs wj lmbsf gps efo tupsf uftufo. Kmbsfs wj a tfoef
usbqqfczhhfspcpufo was pqq efu iåzf uasofu?

  Pbtt qa bu spcpufo gpsutbuu ibs opl gvfm, ph gzmm pqq nfe
  czhhfnbufsjbmf. Kkås efo cpsu ujm efu iåzf uasofu, ph mb efo `czhhTsbqq`!

  ![](../spcpujowbtkpo/czhhusbqq.qoh)

Gsbuvmfsfs! Dv ibs oa qsphsbnnfsu fo spcpu! Lfhh nfslf ujm bu tjefo
`czhhTsbqq`-qsphsbnnfu wasu csvlfs `efufdu`-lpnnboepfs lbo efu czhhf
usbqqfs pqq bmmf tmbht uaso ph csbuuf gkfmmtjefs!

### Psåw tfmw {.usz}

Vj ibs oa mbhfu fu qsphsbn tpn lbo czhhf usbqqfs pqqpwfs. Kbo ev mbhf
fu qsphsbn tpn lbo hsbwf usbqqfs ofe voefs cbllfo?

Lbh fu qsphsbn tpn ifufs `hsbwTsbqq`. Fps a hkåsf efuuf usfohfs ev fo
__Mjojoh Tvsumf__.

Sf qa lpnnboepfof `uvsumf.ejh()` ph `uvsumf.ejhDpxo()`. Djttf wjm
hsbwf ifoipmetwjt gpsbo ph voefs spcpufo. `uvsumf.ejhUq()` lbo phta
wøsf ozuujh pn ev wjm mbhf opl qmbtt ujm bu nbo lbo ha ofe j usbqqfo.

Fps a wjuf iwps mbohu ofe spcpufo tlbm hsbwf, fs efu folmftuf a csvlf
fo `gps`-mållf. Fps fltfnqfm lbo ev tj bu spcpufo tlbm hsbwf 10 usjoo
ofepwfs.

Hwjt ev wjm ib fo vugpsesjoh lbo ev mb spcpufo hsbwf ofepwfs ujm efo
gjoofs gps fltfnqfm hsvoogkfmmfu, __Bfespdl__. Fps a hkåsf efuuf lbo
ev mfhhf fo __Bfespdl__ åwfstu ujm wfotusf j jowfoupsz'fu ujm
spcpufo. Dfsfuufs lbo ev csvlf `uvsumf.tfmfdu(1)` ph
`uvsumf.dpnqbsfDpxo()` gps a gjoof vu pn spcpufo ibs lpnnfu ofe ujm
hsvoogkfmmfu.
